RFC 0002: Rabbit storage for containerized applications (#1)
NearNodeFlash/NearNodeFlash.github.io: rfc/0002/README.md

Rabbit storage for containerized applications
=============================================

**authors**: Nate Roiger <nate.roiger@hpe.com> |
**state**: ideation

---

For Rabbit to provide storage to a containerized application there needs to be _some_ mechanism. The remainder of this RFC proposes that mechanism.

Actors
------

There are several different actors involved

- The AUTHOR of the containerized application
- The ADMINISTRATOR who works with the author to determine the application requirements for execution
- The USER who intends to to use the application using the 'container' directive in their job specification
- The RABBIT software that interprets the #DWs and starts the container during execution of the job

There are multiple relationships between the actors:

> - AUTHOR to ADMINISTRATOR: The author defines how their application is executed and the NNF storage requirements

Reviewer: and what does the admin do?

Reviewer: 👍

- Between the AUTHOR and USER: The application expects certain storage, and the #DW must meet those expectations.
- ADMINISTRATOR to RABBIT: Admin tells Rabbit how to run the container

> - Between USER and RABBIT: User provides the #DW container directive in the job specification, and Rabbit validates & interprets the directive.

Reviewer: mix of `and` and `&`

Proposal
--------

The proposal below might take a couple of read-throughs; I've also added a concrete example afterward that might help.

1. The AUTHOR writes their application expecting NNF Storage at specific locations. For each storage requirement, they define...
    1. a unique name for the storage which can be referenced in the 'container' directive
    2. the expected storage types; if necessary
    3. the required mount path or mount path prefix
    4. other constraints or storage requirements (i.e. minimum capacity)

> 2. The AUTHOR works with the ADMINISTRATOR to define, a unique name for the program, the pod specification for executing their program, and the NNF storage requirements described above. The ADMINISTRATOR creates a corresponding _NNF Container Profile_ custom kubernetes resource.

Reviewer: Maybe worth listing those 3 out in a list:
1. Unique name
2. pod spec
3. NNF storage requirements

3. The USER who desires to use the application works with the AUTHOR and the related Container Profile to understand the storage requirements.

> 4. The USER submits a WLM job with the #DW container fields populated

Reviewer 2: The user is also responsible for the #DW's that specify the storage that the #DW container will use. Maybe that is step 3.5?

Author: I was assuming that was implied, but I could add something like
> The USER submits a WLM job with the #DW container fields populated per the Container Profile and any other necessary #DW directives

5. WLM runs the job and drives the job through the following stages...
    1. Proposal: RABBIT validates the #DW container directive by comparing the supplied values to what is listed in the Container Profile. If the USER fails to meet the requirements, the job fails.

>     2. Pre-run: RABBIT software...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. Pre-run: RABBIT software:
```

        1. creates a config map reflecting the storage requirements and any runtime parameters

>         2. duplicates the pod specification from the Container Profile and patches the necessary Volumes and the config map. The spec is used as the basis for starting the necessary pods and containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        2. duplicates the pod specification from the `NNFContainerProfile` and patches the necessary Volumes and the config map. The spec is used as the basis for starting the necessary pods and containers.
```

Author: The user of english words and not the kubernetes Kind is consistent within this section.

>         2. duplicates the pod specification from the Container Profile and patches the necessary Volumes and the config map. The spec is used as the basis for starting the necessary pods and containers.

Reviewer 3: The pod spec will be used in a deployment/daemonset, to make the container run on the rabbit nodes that go with the Flux job.  Rabbit software will add labels and tolerations to the deployment/daemonset to let k8s schedule this pod on the rabbits.

Author: The end result is pods run on the Rabbits, It doesn't matter how they get there. I don't think we need to mention deployment/daemonset since that just complicates the document.

>     3. The containerized application executes. The expected mounts are available per the requirements and celebration occurs.

Reviewer: Might want to suggest some celebration techniques :)

Author: raises for all?

          - name: nnf-config 
            mountPath: /nnf/config

        # volumes added by Rabbit software
        volumes:
        - name: foo-local-storage
          hostPath:
            path: /nnf/job/my-job/my-gfs2
        - name: foo-persistent-storage
          hostPath:
            path: /nnf/persistent/some-lustre
        - name: nnf-config
          configMap:
            name: my-job-container-my-foo
    ```
    3. Rabbit software starts the pods on Rabbit nodes

Special Note: Indexed-Mount type
--------------------------------

When using a file system like GFS2, each compute is allocated its own Rabbit volume. The Rabbit software mounts a collection of mount paths with a common prefix and an ending indexed value. 

Application authors must be aware that their desired mount-point really contains a collection of directories, one for each compute node. The mount point type can be known by consulting the config map values

If we continue the example from above, the `foo` application would expect the foo-local-storage path of `/foo/local` to contain several directories

```
# ls /foo/local/*

node-0
node-1
node-2
...
node-N
```

> Node positions are ***not*** absolute locations. WLM could, in theory, select physical 6 compute nodes at physical location 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, which would appear as directories /node-0 through /node-5

Reviewer 2: select physical 6 => select 6 physical?

- ADMINISTRATOR to RABBIT: Admin tells Rabbit how to run the containerized application with the required storage.
- Between USER and RABBIT: User provides the #DW container directive in the job specification. Rabbit validates and interprets the directive.

Proposal
--------

The proposal below might take a couple of read-throughs; I've also added a concrete example afterward that might help.

1. The AUTHOR writes their application expecting NNF Storage at specific locations. For each storage requirement, they define:
    1. a unique name for the storage which can be referenced in the 'container' directive
    2. the expected storage types; if necessary
    3. the required mount path or mount path prefix
    4. other constraints or storage requirements (e.g. minimum capacity)
2. The AUTHOR works with the ADMINISTRATOR to define:
    1. a unique name for the program to be referred by USER
    2. the pod specification for executing their program
    3. the NNF storage requirements described above. 
3. The ADMINISTRATOR creates a corresponding _NNF Container Profile_ custom kubernetes resource

> 4. The USER who desires to use the application works with the AUTHOR and the related Container Profile to understand the storage requirements.

Reviewer: NNF Container Profile. I think you should make sure you use the same term everywhere for this.

Author: After it's introduced it's rather redundant - but OK

5. The USER submits a WLM job with the #DW container fields populated
6. WLM runs the job and drives the job through the following stages...
    1. Proposal: RABBIT validates the #DW container directive by comparing the supplied values to what is listed in the Container Profile. If the USER fails to meet the requirements, the job fails. 
    2. Pre-run: RABBIT software will:
        1. create a config map reflecting the storage requirements and any runtime parameters
        2. duplicate the pod specification from the Container Profile and patches the necessary Volumes and the config map. The spec is used as the basis for starting the necessary pods and containers.
    3. The containerized application executes. The expected mounts are available per the requirements and celebration occurs.

Example
-------

Say I authored a simple application, `foo`, that requires Rabbit local GFS2 storage and a persistent Lustre storage volume. As the author, my program is coded to expect the GFS2 volume is mounted at `/foo/local` and the Lustre volume is mounted at `/foo/persistent`

> Working with an administrator, my applications storage requirements and pod specification are placed in an NNF Container Profile `foo`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Working with an administrator, my application's storage requirements and pod specification are placed in an NNF Container Profile `foo`
```

```yaml
kind: NnfContainerProfile
apiVersion: v1alpha1
metadata:
    name: foo
    namespace: default
spec:
    storages:
    - name: $JOB_DW_foo-local-storage
      type: gfs2
    - name: $PERSISTENT_DW_foo-persistent-storage
      type: lustre

>     podSpec:

Reviewer 4: Match what the rest of k8s does for templates.  For example see how they do it with a [DaemonSet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/), where you have /spec/template which is the template for the pod (and thus contains a metadata and spec section of its own).  This will provide consistency with the rest of k8s as well as allow for NnfContainerProfile authors to influence the metadata section of a pod.

Author: Can you explain which template fields would be useful for the admin to define? I'd prefer to keep only truly configurable parameters and not expose too much if possible as that only complicates things.

Reviewer 4: There are two meanings of template.  The simple version and hard version.  I was referring to the simple version, which is I think the minimum, but you might be asking about the hard version.

### Simple
User defines a yaml pod document that gets merged with some additive info by Rabbit.  That means a user ought to be able to specify in NnfContainerProfile all things you might see in a [Pod](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/workload-resources/pod-v1/).  The current proposal does not allow for this, since there is no place for user to influence the pod metadata, which is where you might place labels and annotations.

### Sophisticated
In addition to what you have in Simple, letting the user put SYMBOLS in the spec that get replaced by rabbit.  Offhand I'm not sure what a use case would be (though I have seen it, somewhere...).  But the idea is basically, there's a value that won't be known by the user but that rabbit will know at runtime and could fill in.

--

Somewhat related, you should think about how Pods will be named from a NnfContainerProfile.  It should probably match DaemonSet behavior for consistency, since that is what this will be like.  In fact, NnfContainerProfile is mostly a template for making DaemonSets, isn't it?  So the final Pod name probably needs to have the following identifiers in it:

1. Workflow
2. NnfContainerProfile name
3. Ordinal within the daemonset

So I guess rabbit could use the referenced NnfContainerProfile to create a Daemonset with name $workflow-$NnfContainerProfileName which in turn would pump out Pods with names $workflow-$NnfContainerProfileName-$ordinal (or whatever the daemonset controller does).

Author: I mean the actual PodTemplateSpec https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/master/core/v1/types.go#L4003

        containers:
        - name: foo
          image: foo:latest
          command:
          - /foo
          volumeMounts:
          - name: foo-local-storage
            mountPath: /foo/local
          - name: foo-persistent-storage
            mountPath: /foo/persistent
```

Say Peter wants to use `foo` as part of his job specification. Peter would submit the job with the below directives

> 

Reviewer 4: Not a fan of the $JOB_DW or $PERSISTENT_DW here.  In previous uses these were symbols that were like environment variables in the #DWs and actual environment variables in the process executing the user's job script.  In your proposal, they aren't anything like an environment variable and yet look like them.  In the very least, in this particular context, drop the dollar sign (having trouble escaping it properly in this comment, \\$).

With the proposal there are 4 things that look similar but are actually quite different:
1. JOB_DW_my-gfs2
2. JOB_DW_foo-local-storage
3. PERSISTENT_DW_some-lustre
4. PERSISTENT_DW_foo-persistent-storage

I'm guessing you are trying to accommodate the DWS generic parser with this proposal but that's kind of the tail wagging the dog here, i.e., what is best for users should win out over what the parser is capable of.  If you keep the key in #DW container equal to what gets put in to /spec/volumes[] then it's clear/consistent how what is in the #DW connects to the /spec/volumes[] which in turn connects to the /spec/containers[]/volumeMounts[].

You could change things to
`#DW container ... foo-local-storage=JOB_DW_my-gfs2 foo-persistent-storage=PERSISTENT_DW_some-lustre`
which would at least eliminate the two new variants of JOB_DW/PERSISTENT_DW.

Author: Will drop the $

```
#DW jobdw name=my-gfs2 type=gfs2 capacity=1TB

#DW persistentdw name=some-lustre

#DW container name=my-foo profile=foo                 \
    $JOB_DW_foo-local-storage=my-gfs2                 \
    $PERSISTENT_DW_foo-persistent-storage=some-lustre
```

Peter submits the job to the WLM. WLM guides the job through the workflow states:

> 1. Proposal: Rabbit software verifies the #DW directives. For the container directive, the requirements of Container Profile `foo`, that is `foo-local-storage` and `foo-persistent-storage`, are provided and correct.

Reviewer: NNF Container Profile

> 1. Proposal: Rabbit software verifies the #DW directives. For the container directive, the requirements of Container Profile `foo`, that is `foo-local-storage` and `foo-persistent-storage`, are provided and correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Proposal: Rabbit software verifies the #DW directives. For the container directive, the requirements of NNF Container Profile `foo` (i.e.`foo-local-storage` and `foo-persistent-storage`) are provided and correct.
```

2. Setup: Since there is a jobdw `my-gfs2`, Rabbit software provisions this storage.
3. Pre-Run:

>     1. Rabbit software generates a config map that corresponds to the storage requirements and runtime parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Rabbit software generates a `ConfigMap` that corresponds to the storage requirements and runtime parameters.
```

Author: In the proposal and example I tend to use words rather than the kubernetes resource Kind value

    ```yaml
    kind: ConfigMap
    apiVersion: v1
    metadata:
        name: my-job-container-my-foo
    data:
        $JOB_DW_foo-local-storage:             type=gfs2   mount-type=indexed-mount
        $PERSISTENT_DW_foo-persistent-storage: type=lustre mount-type=mount-point
    ```

>     2. Rabbit software duplicates the `foo` pod spec in the Container Profile and fills in the necessary volumes and config map.

Reviewer: here too

    ```yaml
    kind: Pod
    apiVersion: v1
    metadata:
        name: my-job-container-my-foo
    spec:
        containers:
        # This section unchanged from Container Profile
        - name: foo
          image: foo:latest
          command:
            - /foo
          volumeMounts:
          - name: foo-local-storage
            mountPath: /foo/local
          - name: foo-persistent-storage
            mountPath: /foo/persistent
        

>           # This volumeMount added by Rabbit software

Author: The only complication I see here is that by providing the author/admin the option to add the nnf config, they can choose any arbitrary name. Rabbit, when filling in the volumeMounts[], has no idea what they are referring to.

>           # This volumeMount added by Rabbit software

Reviewer 4: I'm missing the complication.  Everyone uses the name nnf-config.  The user is just defining the path, just like with the file systems.  Rabbit wouldn't need to touch volumeMounts[].

          - name: nnf-config 
            mountPath: /nnf/config

        # volumes added by Rabbit software
        volumes:
        - name: foo-local-storage
          hostPath:
            path: /nnf/job/my-job/my-gfs2
        - name: foo-persistent-storage
          hostPath:
            path: /nnf/persistent/some-lustre
        - name: nnf-config
          configMap:
            name: my-job-container-my-foo
    ```
    3. Rabbit software starts the pods on Rabbit nodes

> Special Note: Indexed-Mount type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Special Note: Indexed-Mount Type
```

--------------------------------

> When using a file system like GFS2, each compute is allocated its own Rabbit volume. The Rabbit software mounts a collection of mount paths with a common prefix and an ending indexed value. 

Author: Yes, but I wouldn't expect a containerized application to use XFS since it's not a shared file system. Unless they were to implement their own locking/synchronization mechanism...

> Application authors must be aware that their desired mount-point really contains a collection of directories, one for each compute node. The mount point type can be known by consulting the config map values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Application Authors must be aware that their desired mount-point really contains a collection of directories, one for each compute node. The mount point type can be known by consulting the config map values
```

> If we continue the example from above, the `foo` application would expect the foo-local-storage path of `/foo/local` to contain several directories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we continue the example from above, the `foo` application would expect the foo-local-storage path of `/foo/local` to contain several directories:
```

```
# ls /foo/local/*

node-0
node-1
node-2
...
node-N
```

> Node positions are ***not*** absolute locations. WLM could, in theory, select 6 physical compute nodes at physical location 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, which would appear as directories /node-0 through /node-5 in the container.

Reviewer: Could you show that example here?

Author: Isn't the above sufficient? I show an `ls` output "node-0, node-1, node-2, ..., node-N", and this is just the case where N=6

> Node positions are ***not*** absolute locations. WLM could, in theory, select 6 physical compute nodes at physical location 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, which would appear as directories /node-0 through /node-5 in the container.

Reviewer 4: I think it is worth adding in an example showing how an NnfContainerProfile would reference the capacity tier lustre file system.  Basically the pod spec template is free form so they can just shove in the reference to the right PV/PVC.

Author: copy_in/copy_out just refer to it as a path in the directive parameters i.e `source=/lus/global/my-file.bin` There's no knowledge of PV/PVC anywhere and I would prefer to keep it that way. 

I'd rather the AUTHOR provide it in `spec.storages[]` and `spec.podSpec.containers[].volumeMounts[]` section in the profile and Rabbit software does the PV/PVC dance.

    1. a unique name for the storage which can be referenced in the 'container' directive
    2. the expected storage types; if necessary
    3. the required mount path or mount path prefix
    4. other constraints or storage requirements (e.g. minimum capacity)
2. The AUTHOR works with the ADMINISTRATOR to define:
    1. a unique name for the program to be referred by USER
    2. the pod template specification for executing their program
    3. the NNF storage requirements described above. 
3. The ADMINISTRATOR creates a corresponding _NNF Container Profile_ custom kubernetes resource with the necessary NNF storage requirements and pod specification as described by the AUTHOR
4. The USER who desires to use the application works with the AUTHOR and the related NNF Container Profile to understand the storage requirements.
5. The USER submits a WLM job with the #DW container fields populated
6. WLM runs the job and drives the job through the following stages...
    1. Proposal: RABBIT validates the #DW container directive by comparing the supplied values to what is listed in the NNF Container Profile. If the USER fails to meet the requirements, the job fails. 

>     2. Pre-run: RABBIT software will:

Reviewer 3: Will they be able to indicate whether the container should be pre-run or post-run?

Author: Is that a requirement?

Reviewer 3: For some reason I thought the container would be a post-run thing.

Reviewer 5: My understanding that the container would be a part of the entire life cycle...  In the case of a new or experimental file system, I think that it would have to be there for setup as well as the rest of the states.

Author: This would complicate the workflow since we don't allocate storage until setup. If this is a requirement then we can pursue it, but for now I'd like it to remain in pre-run.

            - name: foo-persistent-storage
              hostPath:
                path: /nnf/persistent/some-lustre
            - name: nnf-config
              configMap:
                name: my-job-container-my-foo
    ```
    3. Rabbit software starts the pods on Rabbit nodes

Special Note: Indexed-Mount Type
--------------------------------

When using a file system like XFS or GFS2, each compute is allocated its own Rabbit volume. The Rabbit software mounts a collection of mount paths with a common prefix and an ending indexed value. 

Application AUTHORS must be aware that their desired mount-point really contains a collection of directories, one for each compute node. The mount point type can be known by consulting the config map values.

If we continue the example from above, the `foo` application would expect the foo-local-storage path of `/foo/local` to contain several directories

```
# ls /foo/local/*

node-0
node-1
node-2
...
node-N
```

Node positions are ***not*** absolute locations. WLM could, in theory, select 6 physical compute nodes at physical location 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, which would appear as directories /node-0 through /node-5 in the container path.

> Additionally, not all container instances could see the same number of compute nodes in an indexed-mount scenario. If 17 compute nodes are required for the job, WLM may assign 16 nodes to run one Rabbit, and 1 node to another Rabbit.

Author: I would avoid taking any shortcuts if N=1; an indexed-mount directory is always the same no matter the number of mounts it contains.
